Article 1:

Biden to Give Legal Status to Immigrant Spouses of U.S. Citizens
Program could offer work permits, deportation protections and open a path to apply for green cards
By 
Michelle Hackman
Follow
Updated June 17, 2024 5:23 pm ET




2096

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)



President Biden is expected to announce the new immigration program Tuesday at the White House. PHOTO: MANDEL NGAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES
WASHINGTON—President Biden is expected to announce a new immigration program Tuesday that would provide a path to citizenship for hundreds of thousands of immigrants in the country illegally who are married to U.S. citizens, according to lawmakers and others familiar with the matter.

Biden plans to make the announcement at the White House alongside members of Congress, immigration advocates and U.S. citizens who, because of arcane immigration rules, haven’t been able to sponsor their spouses for green cards.

The program has the potential to benefit immigrants who have been living in the country at least a decade, offering them work permits, deportation protections—and a route for them to apply for green cards, which is the pathway to citizenship. The application process is expected to open by the end of the summer, an administration official said.

The program’s size would make it one of the largest immigration initiatives started in recent decades, rivaled only by the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program that former President Barack Obama created to benefit Dreamers in 2012. The White House is also planning to mark the 12-year anniversary of that program, known as DACA, at the event Tuesday.

The Wall Street Journal earlier reported that Biden was weighing the spouses program.

NEWSLETTER SIGN-UP

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
Two weeks ago, Biden announced, in an election-year gamble to lower illegal crossings, one of his harshest immigration policies to date: a blanket asylum ban on immigrants crossing the border illegally. The president’s advisers have thought for months that, to avoid further angering immigration advocates and Latino voters with family members lacking a legal status, new border restrictions ought to be paired with a sweetener to benefit longtime immigrants already living in the U.S. 

The president’s team homed in on the idea of providing immigration relief to spouses because a much smaller version of the program already had existed for a decade for military families, according to people familiar with the discussions. His advisers also pointed to internal Democratic polling that found that most Americans support granting legal status to spouses of U.S. citizens, even if they entered the country illegally.

The new program also has the benefit of targeting a population that immigration advocates have told the White House had been feeling neglected. Though the administration has created several new initiatives to grant more than a million newly-arriving immigrants work permits, immigrants without permanent legal status who have been living in the U.S. for decades—who are primarily Mexican—haven’t benefited.

Even if a migrant who entered the country via the southern border marries a U.S. citizen, the law says he or she must first leave the country for 10 years before becoming eligible for a green card.

Ahead of the announcement, Republicans already had attacked the idea as a form of mass amnesty.

Biden’s new program is underpinned by a provision of immigration law known as parole in place, which essentially allows the government to “admit” these immigrants legally, overriding their illegal entry. That makes it much easier to apply for a green card and can’t easily be undone by former President Donald Trump should he be elected to a second term. And, while immigrants apply for permanent residency, the parole in place grants them deportation relief and access to a work permit.


-----
Article 2:
Nasdaq, S&P 500 Log Records, Lifted by Tech Stocks
Investors await global central-bank decisions, retail-sales data
By 
Jack Pitcher
Follow
June 17, 2024 4:24 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)


June 13
June 17
-1.25
-1.00
-0.75
-0.50
-0.25
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
%
Nasdaq Composite
S&P 500
Dow industrials
Technology shares propelled major stock indexes to fresh highs to start the week.

The S&P 500 added 0.8%, and the Nasdaq Composite was 1% higher. Both closed Monday at records. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 0.5%. Treasury yields rose, with the benchmark 10-year yield hitting 4.277%. 

Information technology was the S&P 500’s best-performing sector, with chip makers having a particularly good day. Broadcom led the way with a 5.4% gain, while Super Micro Computer and Micron Technology also outperformed. 

Monday’s advance extended a hot streak for major stock indexes, which have benefited from increasing confidence in the economy and the prospect of interest-rate cuts from the Federal Reserve later this year. The S&P 500 is now up 15% in 2024. Pullbacks have been rare and volatility has been exceptionally low. 

A flurry of central-bank decisions, economic data and speeches from Fed officials could inject some excitement later in the week. Central-bank officials are due to meet in the U.K., Switzerland, Norway and Australia. Switzerland was an early mover in cutting rates.

U.S. retail-sales data for May are due Tuesday, offering the latest look at the health of the U.S. consumer. Economists polled by The Wall Street Journal expect a 0.2% increase in retail sales from a year earlier. Resilient consumer spending has helped power a strong economy and rising corporate profits. 

If cracks start to show in consumer spending or the labor market, the Fed could slash rates sooner than expected, analysts say.

“We’re watching the labor market closely for any signs that recent weakening might be accelerating as a signal for the Fed to lower rates more than currently expected,” said Steve Wyett, chief investment strategist at BOK Financial. 

Traders in interest-rate derivatives currently see a roughly 65% chance that the central bank will cut rates by its September meeting, according to CME Group. 


Big gains from stock-index heavyweights such as Apple have more than offset weakness elsewhere. PHOTO: DAVID PAUL MORRIS/BLOOMBERG NEWS
Despite 30 records for the S&P 500 this year, some investors are concerned about problems below the surface. More stocks have been falling than rising in recent weeks: The percentage of S&P 500 companies trading above their 200-day moving average fell to the lowest level of the year Monday, according to Dow Jones Market Data. 

Big gains from index heavyweights such as Apple, Microsoft and Nvidia have more than offset weakness elsewhere. The information-technology sector, which has the top weight in the S&P 500, is up 7.9% in the past seven trading days. 

“Breadth has weakened,” said Tim Hayes, chief global investment strategist at Ned Davis Research. “Benchmark records are not confirmed by most markets, sectors and stocks.”

Overseas, volatility in French markets subsided Monday. France’s CAC 40 rose 0.9% after political turmoil in the country drove a selloff across European markets last week. 

In China, stock indexes ended lower, despite data showing that retail sales accelerated in May. Japan’s Nikkei 225 fell 1.8%.
----------
Article 3:
Netanyahu Dissolves Israel’s War Cabinet
The decision-making body, formed at the start of the war to ensure unity, had devolved into disagreements
A house in the city of Kiryat Shmona, Israel, which was hit by a missile fired from Lebanon a few weeks ago.
A house in the city of Kiryat Shmona, Israel, which was hit by a missile fired from Lebanon a few weeks ago. OHAD ZWIGENBERG/ASSOCIATED PRESS
By Anat PeledFollow
Updated June 17, 2024 2:20 pm ET

SAVE

SHARE

TEXT

Explore Audio Center
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu dismantled the war cabinet set up to bring a unified approach to the fight against Hamas, as a top U.S. envoy traveled to the region to push diplomatic efforts aimed at heading off a wider conflict with Hezbollah on the Lebanese border.

Netanyahu said he was scrapping the war cabinet, a small body that was formed at the start of the war and oversaw top decision-making, during a Sunday night security cabinet meeting, an Israeli official said. The decision followed last week’s resignation of war cabinet member Benny Gantz to protest Netanyahu’s handling of the war in Gaza.

Dissolving the war cabinet lets Netanyahu avoid a potentially thorny decision of whether to bring other politicians into the group, including far-right members of his coalition. Instead, the larger security cabinet will continue to decide on matters regarding the war, and Netanyahu will hold smaller forums for sensitive matters, the official said.

Disagreements in the war cabinet have grown for months over how to manage the Gaza war and the hostage crisis. Gantz said publicly that his influence over decisions about the war had diminished since earlier in the conflict.

The biggest counterweight to Netanyahu remains the U.S., which urges more restraint in Israel’s decision-making in the war.


U.S. special envoy Amos Hochstein met with Israeli officials on Monday. PHOTO: MOHAMED AZAKIR/REUTERS
U.S. special envoy Amos Hochstein visited Israel on Monday and met with Netanyahu and other officials. He heads to Lebanon on Tuesday to meet senior officials there. His trip to the region comes after a tense week when an Israeli strike in southern Lebanon killed Taleb Sami Abdullah, one of the most senior members of Hezbollah, and the militant group responded by firing hundreds of rockets and drones at Israel over the course of three days.

“Hezbollah’s increasing aggression is bringing us to the brink of what could be a wider escalation—one that could have devastating consequences for Lebanon and the entire region,” the Israeli military’s chief spokesman, Rear Adm. Daniel Hagari, said Sunday.

Officials involved in the negotiation efforts and analysts say that recent weeks have seen an increase in the quantity and range of projectiles fired by Hezbollah and the depth of Israeli strikes into Lebanon, raising the chances for a miscalculation that could snowball into a full-scale war.

Advertisement

The militant group has launched more than 5,000 rockets, antitank missiles and explosive drones at Israel since the conflict started Oct. 7, according to the Israeli military. Hezbollah has lost 338 fighters, according to a tally based on the group’s statements. Some 95 Lebanese civilians have been killed, according to OCHA, the United Nations humanitarian agency, and Lebanese officials. In Israel’s north, 17 soldiers and nine civilians have been killed as result of the hostilities, according to Alma Research and Education Center.

Concerns have grown in Washington about the conflict on the border. Last week, the commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces made his first Pentagon visit in more than two years, in part to discuss the escalating tensions with Israel. That same day, U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin spoke by phone with his Israeli counterpart, Yoav Gallant, discussing efforts to de-escalate tensions, the Pentagon said.

Hochstein has been involved in indirect talks with Hezbollah, with Nabih Berri, speaker of the Lebanese Parliament, acting as intermediary, according to a person familiar with the discussions. They are discussing a preliminary agreement to end hostilities that would be contingent on a Gaza cease-fire, the person said. Hezbollah is a U.S.-designated terrorist organization.

France is also working a diplomatic track to try to lower the temperature on the border. Delegations have traveled to Paris, Lebanon and Israel in recent weeks with limited success so far.

Advertisement

“The jump-start of negotiations is not there precisely because Hezbollah wants to connect a cease-fire in the north with a cease-fire in Gaza, and the Israelis are saying no. So that’s the main obstacle down the road,” a French diplomatic official said. The diplomat added that France is now asking for a lasting cease-fire in Gaza to create a favorable climate for the negotiation process.


People survey the damage caused by an Israeli air attack in south Lebanon on Friday. PHOTO: WAEL HAMZEH/SHUTTERSTOCK
Gallant on Friday rejected French President Emmanuel Macron’s call for France, the U.S. and Israel to work together to defuse tension on the border.

“Israel will not be a party to the trilateral framework proposed by France,” Gallant said.

Relations between Israel and France have been tense since the French Defense Ministry banned Israeli companies from taking part in a major Paris arms show earlier this month due to the military operation in Rafah.

Tens of thousands of Israelis and Lebanese have been evacuated from their homes from both sides of the border as a result of the fighting.

Mayors and residents of towns in Israel’s north are becoming increasingly frustrated about the situation, with many calling on Israel to be more aggressive in its attacks or even start a war to push Hezbollah back from the border. That would embroil Israel in a dangerous new front while it still has troops tied down in Gaza.

“The motivation to promote such a move rises as the public pressure to promote such a move rises,” says Orna Mizrahi, a former Israeli deputy national security adviser. “Of course when you are fighting on two fronts you are more limited.”

 Adam Chamseddine contributed to this article.
-----
Article 4:
Apple Is Shutting Down Its Buy Now, Pay Later Service
Decision comes just over a year after Apple Pay Later was introduced
By 
Joseph Pisani
Follow
Updated June 17, 2024 6:23 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(2 min)



The Apple Pay Later service sought to use finance to deepen Apple’s relationship with consumers. PHOTO: JENNY KANE/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Apple AAPL 1.97%increase; green up pointing triangle is ending its buy now, pay later service, just over a year after launching it. 

The service, called Apple Pay Later, allowed customers to split purchases between $50 and $1,000 into four payments spread over six weeks with no interest and no fees. 

The initiative, unveiled in March 2023, was part of the company’s push to use finance to deepen its relationship with consumers. It competed with buy now, pay later companies such as Affirm and Klarna.

Apple’s website said Monday that the company is “no longer offering new loans” for Apple Pay Later, but that existing ones aren’t affected. The company said it plans to offer a way for people to apply for buy now, pay later loans from other companies when they check out with Apple Pay, the company’s payment system. 

Last week, Apple said one of those companies would be Affirm, which it is adding as an option in the fall.  Citigroup and Synchrony Financial SYF 3.36%increase; green up pointing triangle will also be a part of the rollout, Apple said. The company is also adding a scannable code that will help shoppers use Apple Pay across the web.

Affirm’s stock closed at $30.81 on Monday. The share price has nearly doubled over the past 12 months, though it remains well below its record high above $160 in late 2021. 

Advertisement

Write to Joseph Pisani at joseph.pisani@wsj.com

--------
Article 5:
The Russian Spies Next Door
Posing as Argentine immigrants in Slovenia, the quiet married couple were in fact part of Putin’s aggressive effort to seed the West with ‘illegal’ intelligence operatives, say authorities

Maria Rosa Mayer Muños and Ludwig Gisch ILLUSTRATION: THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
By Georgi KantchevFollow
, Joe ParkinsonFollow
 and Silvina Frydlewsky
June 17, 2024 12:01 am ET

SAVE

SHARE

TEXT
570 RESPONSES

Explore Audio Center
LJUBLJANA, Slovenia—The young Argentine couple in the pastel-colored house lived a seemingly ordinary suburban life, driving around this sleepy European capital in a white Kia Ceed sedan, always paying their taxes on time and never so much as getting a parking ticket.

Maria Rosa Mayer Muños ran an online art gallery, telling acquaintances she’d left Argentina after being robbed in Buenos Aires by an armed gang at a red light. Her husband, Ludwig Gisch, ran an IT startup. Described by neighbors in their middle-class district of Črnuče as “normal” and “quiet,” the husband and wife appeared to be global citizens: switching from English and German with friends to accentless Spanish with their son and daughter, who attended the British International School.

Yet almost everything about the family from number 35 Primožičeva street was a carefully constructed lie, according to Slovenian and Western intelligence officials. Gisch’s real name is Artem Viktorovich Dultsev, born in the Russian autonomous republic of Bashkortostan and an elite officer in Russia’s foreign intelligence service, the SVR, according to the officials and court documents. 

Mayer Muños is Anna Valerevna Dultseva, a more senior SVR officer than her partner, from Nizhny Novgorod. The couple’s computers contained hardware to communicate securely to handlers in Moscow that was so encrypted neither Slovenian nor U.S. technicians could crack it. In a secret compartment inside their refrigerator, they kept hundreds of thousands of euros in crisp bank notes.

Now, a classified trial is expected to deliver its first judgment in the coming weeks on the couple charged with conducting espionage as “illegals,” or deep-penetration agents—two crucial cogs in Vladimir Putin’s fast-expanding shadow war with the West. 

Officials say that before they were arrested in December 2022, the pair used Slovenia, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Union member state of just two million people, as a base to travel to nearby Italy, Croatia and across Europe to pay sources and communicate orders from Moscow. The bucolic Alpine country of lakes and mountains—and birthplace of Melania Trump—was a perfect choice to conduct operations, with visa-free access across much of Europe and a limited counterintelligence capacity. They had even trained their two young children, Slovenian officials say, telling them that one day their mom and dad may be captured. 


The office building in Ljubljana where the two Russian spies worked. PHOTO: MATJAZ KRIVIC FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Shortly after Mayer Muños and Gisch were arrested in a dawn raid by Slovenia’s security services, another pair of suspected Russian illegals—a woman and man carrying Greek and Brazilian passports—abruptly left their lives in Athens and Rio de Janeiro, abandoning businesses and romantic partners who had no idea of their real identity. 

The pair carried passports identifying them as Maria Tsalla and Ludwig Campos Wittich. In fact, they were married Russian intelligence officers still building out their legend—a spy’s fake background story—separately in Greece and Brazil, a process Western intelligence agencies estimate costs millions of dollars per person. They were called back to Moscow by handlers fearing the collapse of a network after the Slovenia arrests, officials said. 

Other suspected Russian illegals have been exposed across Europe since the Ukraine invasion, from the Netherlands and Norway to the Czech Republic and Bulgaria—the biggest unmasking of deep-penetration agents since the FBI’s 2010 “Operation Ghost Stories” that nabbed 10 Russian spies in America.

Advertisement

Now locked in a Slovenian prison, their children housed with a foster family, the faux-Argentine couple is also a possible component in any prisoner swaps agreed with Russia, including those that may involve jailed Americans Paul Whelan and Wall Street Journal reporter Evan Gershkovich, according to senior Slovenian and U.S. officials. The Kremlin has already expressed interest in getting them back in talks handled by Putin’s longtime close ally, Nikolai Patrushev, according to people familiar with the situation.

Neither the Kremlin nor the SVR responded to requests for comment. 


The passport of ‘Ludwig Gisch,’ Artem Viktorovich Dultsev’s cover name.
The case—being investigated by Slovenian and Western officials at the highest levels of secrecy, with the court proceedings and all materials highly classified—reveals a rare insight into one of the most secretive and prized parts of Russia’s spy machine.

Unlike most spies, illegals don’t pose as diplomats but usually as people unconnected to Russia. They spend years burrowing themselves deep into their target region, creating a spider web of information sources, identifying candidates for recruitment—“talent spotting”—and taking on assignments as a cutout for spies under diplomatic cover, who tend to be under close surveillance by their host countries. 

Created in the early days of the Soviet Union and dramatized in the TV show “The Americans,” a previous generation of Russian illegals in the 1940s had played a key role in stealing American atomic secrets. Stalin, who saw the illegals as a crucial tool for influencing the policies of adversaries and gathering intelligence on potential threats, created specialized training programs and deployed them in strategic Western capitals. 

Advertisement

The program has been reinvigorated by Putin, who allegedly worked with illegals during his time as a KGB officer in East Germany and has sung patriotic Soviet songs with agents caught in the U.S. and returned to Moscow in prisoner swaps. “These are special people, of special quality, of special convictions, of a special character,” he said about illegal spies in a 2017 interview with state television. 

It is highly likely that Putin receives personal briefings on illegals’ exploits around the world, said Dan Hoffman, a former CIA station chief in Moscow.

In the “Operation Ghost Stories” case, the FBI said Russian illegals spent years establishing a seemingly normal existence in the U.S.: They married, bought homes, raised families, and integrated into American society. One of them studied at Harvard and another earned two master’s degrees from Seton Hall University. Two others worked in real estate.

But beneath the surface, they were actively gathering intelligence and transmitting it back to Moscow, while also seeking individuals who could be recruited as future agents. One of them infiltrated a well-connected consulting firm with offices in Manhattan and Washington, D.C., by working as the company’s in-house computer expert, the Journal has reported. Others were even cultivating their own American-born or -raised children as agents with even deeper cover that would be more likely to pass a U.S. government background check.  


The house in Črnuče where Russian spies lived. PHOTO: MATJAZ KRIVIC FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Deep-cover agents face greater risks than embassy-based operatives who work with the protection of diplomatic immunity and are often discreetly deported if caught. Illegals are likely to be handed lengthy prison sentences, meaning a yearslong wait to be released or exchanged in a prisoner swap.

These shapeshifting spies are now becoming a more important tool for the Kremlin after some 700 suspected Russian intelligence officers operating under diplomatic cover were expelled worldwide in the aftermath of the Ukraine invasion. The Czech government recently proposed that all Russian embassy workers in the EU should be restricted from moving freely inside the border-free travel zone in Europe, which would make it more difficult for spies under diplomatic cover to liaise with illegals abroad.

NATO secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said on Thursday that plans were being drawn up to tighten restrictions on the movement of Russian intelligence personnel in Europe.    

Advertisement

“Illegals are again growing in significance for Moscow, especially as the line between espionage and war is becoming almost nonexistent,” said Andrei Soldatov, a Russian security expert who has spent years studying Moscow’s spy networks.

Slovenian officials said that they suspect that an unusual influx of Russian students enrolling in the country’s universities in the past two years, many of whom are in their 40s and 50s, could be cover for more Russian agents. In March, the government deported at least eight Russian students for disseminating pro-Kremlin propaganda and impersonating Slovenians online, according to Slovenian security officials. 

The same month a Russian military attaché Sergei Lemeshev was declared persona non grata after he was discovered running a disinformation operation that involved paying “hundreds of sources” to publish pro-Moscow talking points. 


Vojko Volk, the Slovenian state secretary for international affairs and national and international security. PHOTO: MATJAZ KRIVIC FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
To untangle the truth about the quiet couple who immersed themselves in new roles as an ordinary expat family while leading double lives as Russian spies, the Journal talked to their friends and neighbors; Slovenian, Western and Latin American officials; and reviewed hundreds of sealed documents, including birth and marriage certificates, flight records, Interpol notices and Argentine court records. Along the way reporters found a complex web of lies, from fraudulent documents to the theft of an identity of an infant who died in a small Greek village more than 30 years ago. 

“We know they were important, serious agents,” said Vojko Volk, Slovenia’s state secretary for international affairs and national and international security. “It’s like ‘The Americans,’ except in Slovenia.”

Building a legend
The cover story begins with a 2012 bus journey across Uruguay’s border with Argentina, where the couple began a decadelong effort to build an entirely false identity. 

Advertisement

A cache of sealed Argentine court documents shows Gisch entering the country on a tourist visa from Uruguay and Mayer Muños arriving shortly after from Mexico. The couple then almost immediately began gathering documents—many of them fraudulent—to obtain citizenship. Gisch claimed he was an Austrian citizen born in Namibia to an Argentine mother, which gave him a fast track toward citizenship. Mayer Muños claimed she was Mexican and submitted a birth certificate saying she was born in Greece. 

The couple moved to the Argentine capital and began building out their legend: living in the middle class neighborhood of Belgrano and attracting little attention among the 146 apartments in their building. Mayer Muños attended a public relations class, graduating with top grades. Gisch opened accounts with Banco Galicia and Banco Macro. Neighbors and locals described them as a shy couple who didn’t attend the building’s tenant meetings. The concierge saw them come and go at routine times, with Gisch often wearing a tie. In 2012, Gisch applied for Argentine citizenship, with Mayer Muños applying a year later. In 2013, the couple welcomed a daughter, Sophie.

“They were very polite, respectful,” said the owner of a nearby deli, Jamonería del Virrey, where the couple would buy raw ham and cheese. “They always paid in cash.”


The passport of ‘Maria Rosa Mayer Muños .’ PHOTO: UNCREDITED
Mayer Muños was granted citizenship in November 2014 and a son, Daniel arrived the following August. 

A month later, the couple married in their local registry office in a small ceremony witnessed by two Colombian citizens. Gisch was listed as a merchant, Mayer Muños as an events organizer. 

Slovenian officials and Argentine court and Interpol documents reviewed by the Journal show the couple’s names were Artem Dultsev and Anna Dultseva, suggesting they had married in Russia before they arrived in Argentina. Illegals are often sent abroad as couples, sometimes after an arranged marriage during their training in Russia, espionage experts say. 

Advertisement

A year after their Argentine nuptials, an amendment was made in the marriage certificate, changing Mayer Muños’ mother’s nationality from Austrian to Mexican. The family were set to move to Europe, where background checks by Austria’s government could reveal a hole in their story. 

As they prepared to leave, Gisch drained his Banco Galicia account, the final statement showing a balance of 18,784 Argentine pesos, only $21.    

The family landed in Slovenia—a country roughly the size of New Jersey—on tourist visas in the summer of 2017, for the next act of their double lives, this time in the European Union. 

Gisch established DSM&IT, an online IT business selling domain names and cloud hosting. The company had three followers on X, including the account of his wife’s business, Art Gallery 5’14, an online company buying and selling mostly modern art. The gallery claimed to work with 90 artists and had prolific social-media accounts posting images almost daily. Gisch would ride his bike the short distance from the Črnuče neighborhood into downtown Ljubljana, while his wife would drive the family car.  


Maria Rosa Mayer Muños ran an online art gallery in Ljubljana. PHOTO: MATJAZ KRIVIC FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

A photo posted by Art Gallery 5’14’s Facebook account that Slovenian officials say is Mayer Muños.
In 2019 they received Slovenian residence permits, putting them on a path to citizenship.  

Mayer Muños was using Ljubljana as a base to travel across Europe, posting pictures of art fairs and exhibitions in places like Zagreb and Edinburgh. A photo from the 2019 Art Fair Zagreb shows her adjusting paintings next to a step ladder, her face not visible.

In 2020, the 5’14 gallery organized an online photo competition, Life in Quarantine, with a €500 cash award. None of the hundreds of photos shared on their social-media accounts showed a clear picture of Mayer Muños or Gisch, but one image posted on Facebook in December 2020, the height of the pandemic, appears to be taken at the front gate of the family home, showing four face masks dangling from a washing line.   

Advertisement

“She was always in a good mood and joyful, and had lots of fun together with other artists,” said Marko Milić, a fine art photographer from Croatia who had met Mayer Muños at a Zagreb art fair.

Both companies appeared designed to attract little attention. They were registered in a nondescript building on Ljubljana’s outskirts along with dozens of other foreign companies such as translators, accountants and financial advisers. 

The couple filed annual tax returns and paid promptly, according to Slovenian corporate records. Art Gallery 5’14 claimed in 2021 to have €25,220 in revenues, while the IT company reported €43,785. Neither received public funding or had dealings with entities within tax havens, which could have raised suspicions of Slovenian authorities. 


Majda Kvas, a neighbor, said the two spies kept to themselves. PHOTO: MATJAZ KRIVIC FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
At their two-story home, the couple spoke Spanish with their son and daughter, neighbors said. Majda Kvas, 93 years old, said she never saw any visitors, but remembers them having at least two family picnics in the garden. “They kept to themselves,” she said. “They were quiet, they wouldn’t even say hello.” 

They weren’t quiet enough. 

On Feb. 24, 2022—the same day that Putin began his invasion of Ukraine—the couple were back in Argentina, applying for an express processing of a new, or clean, passport, before immediately returning to Slovenia via Frankfurt. 

Advertisement

A few months later, Slovenia’s spy agency, SOVA, or “Owl,” got a tip from an allied agency: They should look into Gisch and Mayer Muños.

‘A puzzle’
Slovenia’s top security officials called allies, who began working in a multinational cell to retrace their movements in Ljubljana, Buenos Aires and across Europe. “We worked together in the utmost secrecy,” said Volk, the state secretary. “It was a puzzle.” 

Investigators set up wiretaps, collecting text messages and other data from the couple, which showed them meeting sources in European countries. Slovenian officials could see their companies were fronts, financed by cash collected from their handlers and money from prepaid cards as well as transactions between the two firms to give the impression of cash flow. 

In Argentina, police visited the town Gisch had listed on his passport application and found he had never lived there. At the addresses given by the Colombians who witnessed the couple’s wedding, nobody had heard of them. Slovenia requested the fingerprints of Artem Dultsev and Anna Dultseva from Interpol, then sent them to Argentina to compare with Gisch and Mayer Muños. They matched. 

More concerning was that the couple had also begun spying in Slovenia: targeting the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators, or ACER, the only significant EU body based in Ljubljana which coordinates regulatory actions among the bloc on electricity and natural gas. The agency, whose headquarters is located around five miles from the couple’s home, raised its profile after the Ukraine invasion as energy became an especially acute topic for the continent and Russia used its gas supply to squeeze European industry. ACER didn’t respond to a request for comment. 

Advertisement


A scene inside the Ljubljana office building where the two spies ran their cover businesses. PHOTO: MATJAZ KRIVIC FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
The Slovenians and their allies realized the couple were no longer just creating their back story. “They had been awoken,” Volk said.

On Dec. 5, 2022, masked police in tactical gear arrived after midnight, jumped the family’s fence and positioned themselves outside the windows. When the couple raised the shutters, the officers burst in and arrested them. Gisch and Mayer Muños refused to divulge any information to the investigators after their arrest, according to a former official. Their two children—now aged 8 and 11, according to the Argentine court documents—were placed in the care of the state and moved to another school. They are allowed regular visits to their parents in prison. 

Shortly after the arrest, Russia established contact, acknowledging the couple worked for the SVR and saying it wanted them back. Slovenia was eager to quickly trade and to avoid antagonizing the Kremlin, but a deal couldn’t be reached. Slovenian officials had “prayed to get rid of them,” one senior official said.

Mayer Muños and Gisch refused to talk, but Slovenia and its allies were learning more about their activities and other potentially connected agents. When Maria Tsalla fled Greece shortly after the arrests, Greek authorities discovered she had registered her birth on the island of Evia, claiming the identity of an infant who was listed as dying in 1991. Authorities could see the handwritten registry had been altered—a clue to her deception—and that Tsalla had been trying to replace it with a new registration in the Athens suburb of Marousi, one of the first municipalities to digitize records.

Tsalla left behind a boyfriend in Athens who allegedly had no idea she wasn’t from Greece. Greek authorities discovered she was in fact married to another Russian illegal, Campos Wittich, who had lived for some two years in Rio de Janeiro with his Brazilian girlfriend—a veterinarian who worked for the country’s ministry of agriculture. She helped coordinate the social media search for him when he disappeared—only to learn that he was working undercover for Russian intelligence.

Gisch and Mayer Muños have now served more than 18 months in a Slovenian prison. Slovenia’s espionage laws allow for a maximum eight-year sentence, and officials say the couple could be freed after four for good behavior. 

“They were long-term illegals,” said Janez Stusek, SOVA chief until the middle of 2022, several months before the couple’s arrest. “They had a long-term mission trying to infiltrate Slovenia as an entering point into Europe.”

On 35 Primožičeva street, a new couple has moved in. Two bikes are parked on the porch and two children’s badminton rackets are hung on the veranda. Efforts to reach them were unsuccessful, and the owners of the house declined to comment. The new couple, officials and neighbors said, are also Russian.

------------
Article 6:

Elon Musk and the SEC Are on a Collision Course Again
Testimony provided to regulators suggests Musk and an adviser brushed off compliance with a rule about disclosing his purchases of Twitter stock
By 
Dave Michaels
Follow
 and 
Alexa Corse
Follow
June 17, 2024 5:30 am ET




165

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(6 min)



Elon Musk has a long history of feuding with the SEC. PHOTO: DAVID SWANSON/REUTERS
Regulators once accused Elon Musk of fraud over a possible buyout that never happened. Now they are positioned to make similar allegations over one that did.

The Securities and Exchange Commission has been investigating Musk’s late disclosure of his purchases of Twitter stock before he took over the company. Excerpts of Musk’s testimony provided to the SEC, which came to light last month through a separate lawsuit, suggest Musk and his adviser brushed off compliance with a rule that required him to reveal his ownership once it passed 5% of Twitter’s shares.

NEWSLETTER SIGN-UP

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
Musk and his closest adviser on the trades didn’t seek legal advice, for instance, about how to follow the rule while building his stake despite the adviser telling the bank that they had, according to a lawsuit in Manhattan federal court brought by the Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement System against Musk and others. Musk waited to disclose his stake until he owned more than 9% and had an offer to join its board, according to court filings. 

As part of seeking evidence for their lawsuit, the firefighters’ pension fund obtained transcripts of testimony that Musk and his adviser, Jared Birchall, gave to the SEC. The firefighters included parts of those transcripts in a revised complaint against Musk and the other defendants that they filed in late May. 

The testimony could support a claim that Musk violated the rule so he could keep his trading secret and prevent Twitter’s share price from rising while he was buying it, lawyers said. The SEC has said in court papers that it is investigating whether Musk committed civil fraud by delaying his disclosure or misleading the market about his plans. 

Musk’s attorneys haven’t yet responded in court to the revised complaint. They earlier disputed the firefighters’ allegations. Musk’s lawyers didn’t respond to requests for comment for this article.


If the SEC sues Musk for fraud, regulators are likely to ask a court to bar him from serving as an officer or director of a public company, former officials said. PHOTO: TIERNEY L. CROSS/BLOOMBERG NEWS
Musk in 2018 settled SEC fraud claims over a message on Twitter that said he had “funding secured” to take Tesla private, a deal that never happened. When they sued him, regulators asked a court to bar Musk from serving as an officer or director of a public company. Musk avoided the ban by settling the SEC’s lawsuit. He agreed to step down as Tesla’s chairman and paid a $20 million fine.

Musk tried, unsuccessfully, to back out of the earlier settlement agreement. His lawyers have claimed that regulators are obsessed with trying to punish the billionaire.  

The SEC hasn’t filed any enforcement action so far against Musk over his Twitter trading. If the SEC makes a formal complaint against Musk for fraud, regulators are likely to again ask a court to bar him from serving as an officer or director of a public company, former officials said, exposing him to the possibility of removal from Tesla. 

“They sued him previously, and I think they are disappointed with the outcome of that settlement and how he has responded to it,” said Marc Fagel, who previously ran the SEC’s San Francisco office. “They are putting in the extra work to see if they can get a stronger case here.”

The firefighters’ lawsuit against Musk seeks monetary damages. Musk’s lawyers have said the firefighters’ arguments don’t support a fraud claim. Musk acquired Twitter in late 2022 and later renamed the company X Corp. 

In April 2022, Musk disclosed his ownership in Twitter 11 days after the regulatory deadline. He had discussed joining Twitter’s board in late March, and the company offered to put him on its board of directors on April 3, according to court filings, where he could influence its business strategy and approach to content moderation.


Musk’s lawyers have said the firefighters’ arguments don’t support a fraud claim. PHOTO: AMY OSBORNE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES
Musk said he was generally aware that investors need to disclose ownership in a public company when their stake exceeds 5%, according to excerpts of his testimony revealed in the firefighters’ lawsuit. 

Musk likely saved more than $143 million by not reporting his trading on time, The Wall Street Journal reported in May 2022. Investors who sold Twitter shares during 11 days when Musk was out of compliance with the rule were defrauded, the firefighters’ lawsuit says. 

Scheme-liability cases often aren’t successful in litigation, Fagel said. Courts prefer to pin fraud cases on false statements, he said, adding that he is skeptical about the SEC’s chances if it sues and alleges fraud.

Advertisement

“They could have an uphill battle, as even a deliberate plan to evade a mandatory disclosure does not necessarily convert a regulatory violation into fraud,” he said. 

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
Did Musk’s late disclosure hurt other shareholders? Should he be charged with fraud? Join the conversation below.

Musk has to appear one more time before the SEC to answer questions about his Twitter trading, a federal judge ruled last month. Musk had asked the court to quash the subpoena.

Regulators could potentially tie a fraud case to the claim that Musk intended to deceive the market, said James Park, an expert on securities law at the University of California, Los Angeles.

“It’s a little bit more complicated than if he just flat-out lied,” he said, referring to Musk’s statements at the time. “We don’t have that in this case, but we do have something similar and almost as good.”

----------
Article 7:

Russia Suspends Dollar, Euro Trade on Flagship Stock Exchange
Move comes after the U.S. imposed fresh sanctions aimed at further tightening the screws on Moscow’s war machine.
By 
Mauro Orru
Follow
June 13, 2024 8:21 am ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(3 min)



PHOTO: ALEXANDER NEMENOV/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES
Russia halted trading in U.S. dollars, the euro and Hong Kong dollars on the country’s flagship stock exchange Thursday after the U.S. imposed fresh sanctions aimed at further tightening the screws on Moscow’s war machine.

The Bank of Russia said trading sessions in the foreign-exchange, precious metals and derivative markets of the Moscow Stock Exchange with settlements in those currencies had been suspended due to U.S. sanctions. However, currency trading will continue in the over-the-counter market—when two parties engage directly without supervision from an exchange.

The U.S. Treasury sanctioned the Moscow exchange and Russia’s central securities depository that provides bank account services, registration of over-the-counter trades, and liquidity management services.

“We are increasing the risk for financial institutions dealing with Russia’s war economy and eliminating paths for evasion, and diminishing Russia’s ability to benefit from access to foreign technology, equipment, software, and IT services,” Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said in a statement.

Russia’s central bank said people could still buy and sell the currencies through Russian banks and that deposits remained secure. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said in comments carried by Russian state news agency TASS that the central bank is able to ensure stability in all markets.

The Biden administration on Wednesday set out sanctions on more than 300 entities and individuals in an effort to disrupt the networks with third countries through which Russia can procure technology and equipment for its war in Ukraine, singling out China.

Beijing has officially maintained a neutral stance over the Ukraine war, but it remains an economic lifeline for Russia, deepening trade ties that have helped Russian President Vladimir Putin stabilize his economy despite Western sanctions.

The State Department said the latest measures target seven China-based entities that have supplied goods aiding Russia’s war in Ukraine, Belarus-based entities and others based in the U.A.E, Turkey, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova and Singapore that have supplied dual-use goods to Moscow.

Earlier this year, The Wall Street Journal reported that drones and U.S.-made computer chips were increasingly flowing to Russia from China through Central Asian trade routes snaking through former Soviet republics like Kyrgyzstan.

Washington also sanctioned companies involved in Russia’s energy projects, the metals and mining industry as well as producers of Russian weapons systems and military components.

“Today’s actions strike at their remaining avenues for international materials and equipment, including their reliance on critical supplies from third countries,” Yellen said.

--------
Article 8:
Boeing’s CEO Search Hits Some Snags
GE boss Larry Culp declines approach to take over airplane maker
By 
Emily Glazer
Follow
 and 
Sharon Terlep
Follow
June 17, 2024 2:25 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(5 min)



Boeing CEO David Calhoun said recently that he would step down by the end of the year. PHOTO: AARON SCHWARTZ/ZUMA PRESS
Several high-profile candidates have turned down the chance to run Boeing BA 0.63%increase; green up pointing triangle, complicating the jet maker’s search for a new leader amid discussions about whether the next CEO needs to be based near its Seattle-area factories.

Boeing Chief Executive David Calhoun said in March he would step down by the end of the year. GE Aerospace GE 4.72%increase; green up pointing triangle CEO Larry Culp, widely considered a natural for the job, declined Boeing’s request to consider taking over, said people familiar with the discussions. 

Other potential candidates—Boeing’s operating chief Stephanie Pope and Spirit AeroSystems SPR 3.82%increase; green up pointing triangle boss Pat Shanahan—face complications on their path to the top job, while one of the company’s own directors, aerospace veteran David Gitlin, also declined an approach.

Calhoun heads to Capitol Hill on Tuesday to testify before a Senate panel in a face-off that promises to underscore the thorny nature of the job Boeing is trying to fill. He is expected to be questioned on everything from mounting whistleblower allegations to the chain of events that led to January’s near catastrophe in which a piece of fuselage blew off a Boeing 737 while in flight. 

Calhoun’s successor will have to deal with those issues, while rooting out ingrained quality problems that have led to massive production delays and drawn the ire of airline customers, federal regulators and investors. 


GE Aerospace CEO Larry Culp. PHOTO: JOEL ARBAJE FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
Some of the discussions have included whether the next leader should be based near Boeing’s manufacturing plants in the Seattle area that make 737s and other jets, some of the people said. Boeing moved its headquarters to Chicago in 2001, and in 2022, the company announced plans to move the main offices to Arlington, Va. It has a factory in South Carolina that produces 787s.

The executive search is being handled by recruiting and advisory firm Russell Reynolds and Boeing’s recently appointed Chairman Steven Mollenkopf, a former Qualcomm chief executive. Among the scenarios that have been discussed is having Mollenkopf step into the CEO role for a transition period, especially if the company is aiming for an internal candidate such as Pope to take over, the people said.    

Culp, GE’s first-ever outsider CEO who rehabilitated the industrial giant, was a favorite of investors and suppliers. He is known as a guru in the world of lean manufacturing, a management philosophy focused on cutting waste while continuously improving quality. 

Culp has said publicly that he intends to stay at GE Aerospace, which has shed its other businesses to focus on making jet engines used in Boeing and Airbus planes.

Gitlin, the current CEO of manufacturer Carrier Global, said on an earnings call in April that he told Boeing’s board to remove him from the list of potential contenders. Gitlin’s relative youth, his success at Carrier and years spent at United Technologies made him an attractive candidate.     

Pope was named Boeing’s chief operating officer in December, beating out other internal candidates. Boeing put Pope in charge of the troubled commercial airplane unit after the Alaska Airlines accident.

Calhoun has called the assignment trial by fire. But Pope, a 30-year Boeing veteran, must contend with calls, coming from investors, airline customers and some politicians, for Boeing to pick an outsider. Pope also has a background in finance, while some insiders and observers are lobbying for a CEO with engineering credentials. 

2024
June
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
$270
Shanahan spent three decades at Boeing, where he earned a reputation as an operational fixer. Last year he took over as CEO of troubled fuselage supplier Spirit AeroSystems. He is an engineer by training and was acting defense secretary for six months under President Donald Trump. 

Shanahan has held discussions with Boeing about the CEO job, but the talks are largely on hold as Boeing negotiates to take over Spirit. 

Spirit also makes parts for Boeing rival Airbus. The future of those operations had been the main sticking point in the sale, but Spirit and Airbus have since worked out key issues, according to people familiar with the discussions. 

Airbus said in a statement Monday that it is in early-stage negotiations with Spirit over options for its programs with the supplier, which include potentially acquiring Spirit operations that make Airbus parts.

Boeing executives have said they hope to have a deal by the end of June

----------
Article 9:
‘Inside Out 2’ Hits $155 Million in U.S. for Year’s Biggest Opening Weekend
Film’s strong showing marks a comeback for Pixar and is a bright spot during a slow summer at the box office
By 
Sarah Krouse
Follow
 and 
Ginger Adams Otis
Follow
Updated June 16, 2024 1:22 pm ET




30

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)



A scene from ‘Inside Out 2,’ which had the second-strongest domestic animated-film opening ever. PHOTO: PIXAR/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Pixar’s “Inside Out 2” generated an estimated $155 million in U.S. sales in its opening weekend, the strongest debut for a film this year and a jolt for the summer box office.

The sequel to the Oscar-winning 2015 hit far exceeded expectations, drawing moviegoers with a cluster of new, animated emotions and the travails of growing up. The strong showing marks a box-office comeback for the Disney DIS 1.55%increase; green up pointing triangle unit. It was the second-biggest domestic opening weekend in Pixar’s history and the second-strongest domestic animated-film opening ever, according to Comscore, in both instances behind “Incredibles 2,” which took in $182.7 million in its 2018 opening.

“Inside Out 2” grossed an estimated $140 million over the weekend internationally, giving it an estimated $295 million in global ticket sales. 

The film centers on 13-year old Riley, who grapples with new, unpleasant feelings like Anxiety, Envy, Ennui and Embarrassment that rival emotions that audiences met in the original film such as Joy, Fear and Anger.

The robust opening for the Pixar sequel comes a week after “Bad Boys: Ride or Die” notched its own strong debut, signs that new iterations of beloved movies can draw sizable audiences. Many of Hollywood’s major studios are delivering sequels this year, hoping familiar characters and story lines will resonate with viewers. 


Cast members at the premiere of ‘Inside Out 2’ earlier this month. PHOTO: RODIN ECKENROTH/GETTY IMAGES
While Pixar, the studio behind “Toy Story,” “Finding Nemo” and “WALL-E,” has long been one of the most “bulletproof brands in the business,” it hit a rough patch in recent years, said Paul Dergarabedian, Comscore’s senior media analyst. Strong opening-weekend ticket sales for “Inside Out 2” are “huge” for the studio, he said. 

Last year’s “Elemental” got off to a tough start at the box office but gradually drew bigger crowds and was a hit on the Disney+ streaming service. “Lightyear,” the origin story of Buzz Lightyear released in 2022, was the first Pixar film to be shown in theaters in more than two years but fell short of expectations. Disney this year brought to theaters three Pixar films that had initially been released straight to Disney+ during the pandemic: “Turning Red,” “Soul” and “Luca.”

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
Do you have plans to see Pixar’s ‘Inside Out 2’? Join the conversation below.

The domestic box office from January to June 16 is down 24% from the same time last year. While there were four films that had grossed $100 million or more in their opening weekends by this time last year, only “Inside Out 2” has cracked that threshold in 2024, according to Comscore.

“We’re trying to claw our way out of a deficit. We’re not going to get out of this overnight,” said Dergarabedian. Last year’s Hollywood strikes and resulting changes to release schedules have contributed to this year’s sluggishness, he said.

“Inside Out 2”’s opening weekend haul handily propels it ahead of “Dune: Part Two,” distributed by Warner Bros., “Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire” from Legendary Pictures and Warner Bros., and “Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes” from 20th Century Studios.

Its domestic gross far exceeded the $90 million that box-office trackers expected.

The movie made its debut at an opportune time: School is ending for the summer for many children, and there has been a dearth of family movies in theaters, other than “The Garfield Movie” released in late May. “Kids don’t care if the box office is up or down. They want to be entertained. They just want to have fun,” Dergarabedian said.

-----------
Article 10:
Microsoft’s Nadella Is Building an AI Empire. OpenAI Was Just the First Step.
After landing the deal that launched his company to the front of the artificial-intelligence race, the tech chief is spreading his bets. Will it be enough?
Satya Nadella at the Microsoft Build conference in Seattle last month.
Satya Nadella at the Microsoft Build conference in Seattle last month. JASON REDMOND/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES
By Tom DotanFollow
 and Berber JinFollow
June 12, 2024 9:00 pm ET

SAVE

SHARE

TEXT
158 RESPONSES

Explore Audio Center
Chief Executive Satya Nadella bet the future of Microsoft MSFT 0.22%increase; green up pointing triangle on the potential of artificial intelligence when he forged a groundbreaking partnership with OpenAI, the creator of ChatGPT. 

But Nadella is not content to simply rely on OpenAI to dominate in this new era. In recent months, he’s been spreading his bets, turning the world’s biggest company into the world’s most aggressive amasser of AI talent, tools and technology. He has hunted down new partners around the globe and invested in a range of AI startups, including pouring $1.5 billion into an Abu Dhabi-based firm in April.

Nadella has also begun building what amounts to an in-house OpenAI competitor inside Microsoft—potentially putting it on a collision course with its most important partner. 

To lead Microsoft’s AI efforts, he recruited Mustafa Suleyman, a longtime rival of OpenAI’s co-founder, Sam Altman. Suleyman, who helped launch DeepMind, a pioneering AI research firm, and went on to co-found Inflection AI, an AI startup, has brought most of his team from Inflection with him to Microsoft. 

The new employees have led the process to train their own artificial-intelligence model, built on technology developed at Inflection and designed to be on par with the OpenAI technology Microsoft depends on today. A person familiar with the matter said that some future Microsoft AI products could be switched from OpenAI technology to the model being developed by Suleyman’s team.


A deconstructed Microsoft Surface Laptop on display following a showcase of the company’s AI assistant Copilot at Microsoft headquarters in Redmond, Wash., last month. PHOTO: LINDSEY WASSON/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Nadella’s approach to AI is emblematic of his decade at the helm, during which he has repeatedly reinvented big parts of Microsoft, picking new partners and retooling the tech company. He has been able to spot when one-time company strengths became vulnerabilities and upend even his own strategies.

Nadella’s moves have helped Microsoft leapfrog others—most notably the longtime AI front-runner Google—to release AI chatbots and workplace tools expected to change how people think and work. The question is whether these tactics will be enough to keep Microsoft ahead of the pack in artificial intelligence. 

Google has dramatically overhauled its AI organization and put out products that rival those made by the OpenAI-Microsoft consortium, including an AI feature atop its dominant search engine. Meta Platforms has been investing billions into a powerful AI language model, Llama, that it is releasing for free under an open source license. Amazon has invested $4 billion in Anthropic, which it hosts on the largest cloud computing platform in the world.

Advertisement

This week, Apple announced it was integrating OpenAI’s tech into its mobile operating system, further shaking up the competitive landscape for AI dominance.

Microsoft’s rising status has made it a target for regulators and competitors. Regulators are investigating its acquisitions and investments, worried it may already have too much control of the emerging AI market. The Federal Trade Commission recently launched an investigation into whether Microsoft’s Inflection deal was structured to avoid government antitrust review. That came on top of another FTC probe launched in January of other artificial-intelligence deals, including Microsoft’s relationship with OpenAI. Companies including the New York Times are suing Microsoft and OpenAI, alleging that they illegally trained their software on the media companies’ content. 

And despite a soaring stock price, company morale has struggled as outsiders have been brought in to reshape aspects of its technology. 

Mikhail Parakhin, the previous head of Microsoft’s Bing and advertising businesses, plans to leave the company after initially being assigned to report to Suleyman, according to people familiar with the matter. Saurabh Tiwary, who oversaw the team of AI engineers responsible for integrating OpenAI’s tech into Bing, has already left for Google.

Microsoft said its retention rates are high and that some bumpiness is to be expected when companies make organizational changes.

Culture changes
While he has been trying to make Microsoft move more like a startup, Nadella has been the ultimate company lifer. The 56-year-old from Hyderabad, India, worked his way up through its Bing search and cloud infrastructure businesses over the last 32 years.

He was a surprise pick as CEO, taking over after years under Steve Ballmer when the company seemed stuck. The company had grown bloated—expanding costly divisions like hardware and Xbox—and missed tech trends, such as the emergence of mobile phones. In the 14 years under Ballmer, Microsoft’s share price fell more than 30%. 

Advertisement

When Nadella took over in 2014, Microsoft was mired in infighting among siloed groups, current and former employees say. Projects were frequently divided across separate divisions with multiple leaders. Teams often didn’t communicate with each other and fought for company resources.

One meme swapped in emails among employees: a cartoon of three organizational charts at Microsoft pointing guns at each other. A “Reservoir Dogs”-style standoff had become a symbol of the company’s culture.

Another problem, current and former employees say: It was plagued by a “not-invented-here” syndrome, where executives regularly rejected outside ideas and products. 

Nadella pushed for more internal cooperation with fewer centers of power. He also embraced other tech giants more than any of his predecessors.


Nadella at a 2014 event in San Francisco, where he unveiled Microsoft Office software for Apple’s iPad and iPhone. PHOTO: DAVID PAUL MORRIS/BLOOMBERG
Among his first public appearances as CEO was a press briefing, where he took the stage to debut Microsoft Office for the iPad and iPhone. For years, the company had been dismissive of Apple’s mobile devices, preferring to build its own hardware than strike a partnership.

Nadella’s first few years on the job were marked by big acquisitions, including LinkedIn in 2016 for $26.2 billion and GitHub in 2018 for $7.5 billion. He would go on to do more than 300 deals worth over $170 billion in total. 

These acquisitions would not only expand Microsoft’s businesses—bringing them into new areas like professional social networks and coding collaboration—but would also infuse the company with new blood. 

Advertisement

LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman joined Microsoft’s board of directors. LinkedIn’s head of engineering, Kevin Scott, was given the newly created role of chief technology officer. 

‘Years behind’
Scott fretted in a 2019 email to Nadella and then Chairman Bill Gates that the company’s AI infrastructure was far behind Google’s. And tools like Gmail autocomplete were getting “scarily good.”

“We are multiple years behind the competition,” Scott wrote.

Microsoft’s AI efforts had been spread among dozens of teams scattered across the company.  

The company also had trouble recruiting top AI talent, said one Microsoft executive. Promising candidates would admit they were meeting with Microsoft as practice before going to places they would rather work—usually Google. 

In 2018, Nadella met OpenAI’s Altman at the Allen & Co. conference in Sun Valley, Idaho. He was impressed with the startup’s AI and thought it could expose Microsoft to more sophisticated tools. OpenAI could also become a banner customer for Azure, Microsoft’s cloud computing platform.


OpenAI CEO Sam Altman at the company’s office in San Francisco in March. PHOTO: CLARA MOKRI FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
When Microsoft invested $1 billion in OpenAI, it was a controversial move internally. Even Gates was initially skeptical that Microsoft needed to invest so much in an outside company when the company had its own AI. 

As part of the deal, OpenAI said it would exclusively use Microsoft’s Azure cloud and Microsoft promised to invest in the expensive chips needed to meet OpenAI’s voracious demand.

When Nadella saw an early demo of an AI-powered chatbot built into Microsoft’s Bing search engine—using OpenAI’s technology—he asked his team what they needed to make it a hit product.

Advertisement

Engineers told him that if millions of people were to use the chatbot, it would require every high-end chip the company had. That would mean taking the chips away from Microsoft’s many other projects and customers.     

“What if I could get them for you?” he asked.  

Microsoft started purchasing enormous amounts of the GPU chips used for AI and invested another $10 billion in OpenAI in 2023. 

Resource fights
The decision would ripple through Microsoft. Many divisions, including hardware, felt the pinch to their budgets. The hardware group’s leader, Panos Panay, decamped for Amazon to lead its Alexa division last fall. Rubén Caballero, the head of HoloLens, Microsoft’s augmented reality project, has also left.

In February 2023, Nadella debuted the new Bing with a splash and a promise that with AI, Microsoft could finally make Google “dance.” Microsoft integrated OpenAI’s technology into its entire lineup. It created AI assistants it calls Copilots that plug into its biggest software products including Word, Excel and PowerPoint. The pitch was that with simple language commands, people can use Copilots to quickly create sophisticated slide decks or legal contracts.

The wisdom of Nadella’s dependence on OpenAI came into doubt last fall after OpenAI’s board ousted Altman in a surprise coup. The move exposed the fragility of Microsoft’s position of dependence on a startup it didn’t control. 

Advertisement


Two women wearing HoloLens devices try out a Windows mixed reality immersive experience at the Microsoft Build 2017 developers conference. PHOTO: ELAINE THOMPSON/ASSOCIATED PRESS
Nadella ultimately helped outmaneuver OpenAI’s board by publicly offering to bring Altman and any departing OpenAI employees to Microsoft. Altman was reinstated and Microsoft was given a nonvoting seat on the board.

The wrangling also triggered regulators. Officials in Europe and the U.S. have begun investigating the relationship between Microsoft and OpenAI, looking into how much control the giant has over the startup. 

Microsoft has repeatedly stated that it has only a non-controlling stake in the revenue produced by OpenAI’s for-profit arm. 

News Corp, owner of The Wall Street Journal, has a content-licensing partnership with OpenAI. 

Altman’s image as a controversial celebrity CEO has ruffled feathers at Microsoft. Some employees are concerned that the media storm after actress Scarlett Johansson claimed that OpenAI surreptitiously created an AI voice modeled on her reflected poorly on their efforts to make AI a more trusted technology. 

Advertisement

New balance of power
Altman’s status as the most important figure determining Microsoft’s AI strategy is becoming less certain, thanks to the arrival of Suleyman and his team.

Suleyman was a co-founder of DeepMind, the trailblazing AI company that was bought by Google and became the engine of its artificial intelligence efforts. Altman, along with Elon Musk, launched OpenAI as a nonprofit in 2015 partly to ensure that the future of AI was not explored in secret and controlled by Google.

Suleyman left DeepMind to help start Inflection in 2022, joining forces with LinkedIn co-founder Hoffman, one of OpenAI’s earliest investors and a board member. Altman was frustrated that Hoffman had started a competitive venture, said people familiar with the matter. Hoffman resigned from OpenAI’s board not long after he started Inflection.

Inflection’s attempt to popularize its AI companion, named Pi, wasn’t catching on despite raising $1.3 billion. Microsoft was already a fan of the company—it had invested hundreds of millions into it—when Nadella decided to recruit Suleyman.  

Nadella spent more than a month discussing a potential move with Suleyman, who eventually agreed to come over with most of his team and was given the title of CEO of AI.

Microsoft insiders say the internal politics and the balance of power between the longtime rivals Suleyman and Altman have been confusing. The Inflection co-founder is set to be one of the main points of contact between Microsoft and OpenAI, said a person familiar with the matter.

Advertisement

Microsoft has announced that Suleyman’s Microsoft AI organization will be responsible for consumer-facing AI products like Copilots for Bing and Windows. Nadella has internally expressed frustration that Bing’s position as a distant second hasn’t improved as much as he’d hoped despite the AI upgrade, according to people familiar with the matter. Suleyman’s hiring is a gamble to fix that, they said.


Mustafa Suleyman at The Wall Street Journal’s WSJ Tech Live Conference in Laguna Beach, Calif., last fall. Suleyman has brought most of his team from Inflection with him to Microsoft.  PHOTO: PATRICK T. FALLON/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES
Nadella has given Suleyman’s team a large budget and wide latitude to operate. They have absorbed other AI teams. Some long-term Microsoft employees view the Inflection imports as a foreign body; these new employees communicate through Slack rather than the Microsoft-owned Teams tool.

Microsoft said that new and existing teams work together.

Even with Suleyman’s division ascendant, Microsoft has worked to quell speculation there is any friction with OpenAI. At Microsoft’s annual developer conference in May, Nadella stood beneath a giant slide saying, “Microsoft Loves OpenAI,” with the word “loves” represented by a blue heart. Altman was a special surprise guest.

Advertisement

All the change and pressure have weighed on employees. The sprint in particular to launch Copilot for Bing by its February deadline last year was grueling, according to people familiar with the matter. The ongoing push to put AI into more products has caused a sense of burnout from some employees on the project.

Still, Nadella isn’t slowing down. Microsoft’s shares have surged more than 10-fold under his watch, lifting it above Apple for much of this year to make it the largest company in the world by market value. One of his top priorities today is rebranding the Azure cloud as the go-to place for startups. 

He has told his office that whenever he visits a city, he will take meetings that help the company close deals with AI startups. As he has repeatedly emphasized to Microsoft’s employees in all-hands meetings over the last year, the goal is to use AI to vault past rivals Amazon and Google.

In November, Nadella also approved a program giving early-stage startups free access to some of Microsoft’s computing clusters, a strategy meant to win their allegiance in the event they become the next breakout success.

The company has signed deals to bring startups such as Cohere and French startup Mistral AI onto Azure. Both companies are developing large language models that compete with OpenAI. In April, Microsoft invested $1.5 billion in Abu Dhabi-based AI company G42, which will have the company run its software and services on Azure.

Arvind Jain, CEO of Glean, an enterprise AI company, has repeatedly met with Nadella during the Microsoft chief’s recent startup charm offensive. Jain, like many other founders, didn’t initially consider Microsoft a player in the startup game but today runs his AI assistant off Microsoft’s cloud.

“Microsoft makes the effort to connect and reach out,” Jain said. “When we started our team didn’t consider Azure as an option. AI changed that.”

------------
Article 11:

The Only App That Always Wins the Battle for Your Attention
Duolingo taps into the power of streaks and hooks you with perfectly timed nudges. Can its success translate to other companies?

EMIL LENDOF/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, ISTOCK
Ben Cohen hedcutBy Ben CohenFollow
June 14, 2024 9:00 pm ET

SAVED

SHARE

TEXT
99 RESPONSES

Explore Audio Center
Every night, my phone buzzes with an urgent message from a cartoon owl. 




The notifications keep coming with an increasingly frantic tone until I inevitably do what I’m supposed to do: I open Duolingo DUOL 3.88%increase; green up pointing triangle. 

Which makes me just like millions of other people who find themselves coming back to this app day after day after day. 

The ability to get people hooked and keep them engaged is one of the holy grails in business. Few companies do it better than Duolingo, the world’s most popular app for learning another language, which takes advantage of two concepts that translate to lots of other industries: streaks and notifications. 

It’s why Duolingo has become one of the biggest winners in the global battle for your attention. 

Think about all the notifications you get from the moment you wake up until you fall asleep. Emails and WhatsApps and way too many calendar pings. Amazon deals. Instagram likes. Weather updates. NBA parlays, scores, highlights and podcasts. News alerts. Texts from mom. Slacks from the boss. Flight cancellations. Flight rebookings. Flight delays. More news alerts. Every time you check a screen these days, there’s another notification waiting to be ignored. 

So why are you always opening the ones from Duolingo? 

It’s not just because you’re intrinsically motivated. It’s mostly because behind that cartoon owl named Duo is a large team of engineers, researchers, strategists and product managers giving you that extra push. 

The best way to learn a language is getting in the habit of daily practice, and the best way to form that habit is getting a well-timed nudge, which makes streaks and notifications essential to Duolingo’s surprising business success. 

Advertisement

I wrote an entire book about the power of streaks, but I’ve never come across an example of streaks as powerful as Duolingo. 

Humans are so wired to look for streaks that we see them even where they may not exist. Duolingo takes our propensity for streaks and turns it into a motivational tactic. It turns out people are willing to do all sorts of peculiar stuff if they have the incentive of a streak—like sneaking out of a bar right before midnight to speak a few minutes of Japanese. 

The longest active Duolingo streak is now longer than 4,100 days. The only thing more impressive than a few people using the app every day for more than a decade is that five million people have streaks of a year. In fact, the company says that more than 70% of the product’s more than 30 million daily active users have weeklong streaks. 

Those numbers are especially notable because of Duolingo’s competition: everything you can do on a phone that doesn’t require verb conjugation. 


Duo, the owl mascot of Duolingo, in New York for the company’s initial public offering in 2021. PHOTO: DUOLINGO
“When you’re comparing learning with a TikTok,” said Liz Nagler, a senior director of product management at Duolingo, “you’re comparing broccoli with a dessert.” 

But more than 30 million people every day are willing to eat vegetables when they could be stuffing their faces with ice cream. 

Duolingo was founded in 2011 by Luis von Ahn, a Carnegie Mellon University computer scientist at the time, and Severin Hacker, one of his graduate students. Today, von Ahn is the chief executive officer, and Hacker is the chief technology officer. Since it went public in 2021, the company has outperformed the S&P 500 index, and it’s worth around $8.5 billion today. 

Advertisement

Most people use the free version of Duolingo, but most of the company’s money comes from paid subscriptions. The rest comes from advertising and in-app purchases. Also, tacos. Yes, tacos. In financial documents, the company diligently breaks out its revenue from Duo’s Taqueria, the Mexican restaurant adjacent to its headquarters in Pittsburgh’s tech hub. (Last year, tacos accounted for $682,000 of $531 million.)   

But forget tacos. Let’s get back to broccoli and how Duolingo makes it taste like a hot-fudge sundae.

There are many companies that might not be eager to remind people of their usage habits. You’ve watched Netflix for 162 nights in a row. Last chance to extend your streak! Duolingo is the opposite. One of the company’s most reliable methods of bringing users back to the app is simply telling people how much time they have already invested. 


Duolingo’s secret weapon is a string of code known as a multi-armed bandit algorithm, which tests different messages and sends the best one at exactly the right time to maximize the number of people who open it.

Other companies bombard you with messages that begin to feel like spam, and they can get so annoying that you turn off notifications entirely. But if it seems like every time Duolingo sends you a notification, it’s tailored specifically for you and sent at precisely the moment when you’re most likely to click, well, that’s because it is.

There are two sorts of notifications that are particularly irresistible.

Advertisement

The first is known internally as the streak-saver notification. It pops up on your phone when there’s an hour left in the day, often with the alarm of a siren emoji. 

 




It’s personalized, unpredictable, timely and not exactly subtle. It’s also intentionally crafted to evoke loss aversion, the idea coined by the legendary psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Duolingo understands something important about our behavior: We want to extend our streaks, but what we really want is to not lose our streaks. 

Just ask James Clark. He managed to extend his 471-day streak this year from the Mount Everest Base Camp trek. 

He was so exhausted every night of his trip that he could barely think straight, much less speak Spanish. “I didn’t really want to do Duolingo,” Clark said. “But what I really didn’t want to do was lose my streak.” So the video editor from Britain bought a Wi-Fi card to call his girlfriend and keep his streak. “Mainly so I could keep my streak,” he said. 

Advertisement

Most users like to save their daily lessons for late at night, like Clark, who often finds himself falling asleep only to wake up in a Duolingo panic. In the U.S., the top percentage of notifications gets sent around 10 p.m. ET, and the optimal time to send a notification for a lesson is actually pretty simple: 24 hours after the last lesson. 

But not always. 

Aislinn Keogh is a linguistics graduate student in Scotland with a 1,578-day streak. Of the 40 languages offered by Duolingo, she has experience with the most spoken (Spanish and French) and the least (Hawaiian and Scottish Gaelic). She usually does Duolingo at night. But on the 922nd day of her streak, she took a Norwegian lesson early in the morning, since she had plans that evening: She was getting married. 

The second type of effective notification is one that Clark, Keogh and Duolingo addicts never see. It’s called the passive-aggressive notification.

After a week of inactivity, Duolingo gets the hint and stops sending messages. But on that seventh day, before it rests, the app tries one last notification: 

These reminders don’t seem to be working. We’ll stop sending them for now. 

That one does work. As it happens, it’s one of their most successful alerts, Nagler says. 


A little positive reinforcement from Duolingo PHOTO: DUOLINGO
She knows this because Duolingo relentlessly A/B tests every product feature before it gets rolled out. Even a few words can lead to a small increase in retention and engagement, and those small increases compound and make a huge difference over time. Take these two notifications: 

1. Start a new habit! It’s not too late to learn a language in 2020

2. Reach your goals! Keep your resolution going with a lesson.

Advertisement

They might look similar, but they’re not. The first one performed significantly better. That’s because habits are stickier than goals. As it turns out, when Duolingo tested prompts like “turn on streak reminders” and “build a long-term habit with reminders,” it found that simply mentioning the word habit led to a 5% improvement. 

This sort of rigorous experimentation is necessary because the degree of difficulty of getting people back to Duolingo every day is much higher than you might suspect. 

“It’s really easy to get people addicted to things like social media or mobile games,” Nagler said. “Learning is really hard.” 

Anyone familiar with Duolingo knows it can feel more like FarmVille than French class. It’s loaded with so many gamification techniques that you might wonder if you’re really learning through bite-sized lessons, odd-looking characters and stories about horses going to the movies. 

But that’s the point. The streaks and notifications are designed to keep you coming back. Still, you wouldn’t keep coming back if not for the algorithms, decades of research and even an AI model called Birdbrain that help you learn without realizing you’re learning. The broccoli might taste like ice cream, but it still has to be broccoli. 

“There are many other apps that are better than us at entertaining, but people come to Duolingo not for entertainment but to learn something,” said Bozena Pajak, the company’s vice president of learning and curriculum. “If we don’t teach people something, they won’t stay with us. No matter how fun it is.” 

Or how many messages you get from a cartoon owl. 
